---
title: Man Booker 2018 (and me)
layout: page
---
I have decided as part of my new year introspection to read the [Man
Booker
shortlist](https://themanbookerprize.com/fiction/news/man-booker-prize-announces-2018-shortlist)
before the final award is announced Tuesday 16 October in London’s
Guildhall. This gives me about 3 weeks to read through and reach my
opinions and thoughts before watching the live announcement on the
BBC.

At the same time I will be travelling, so the reading will occur in
London, Santa Clara (San Francisco) and Johannesburg (South Africa).

In order to help me form my thoughts and understand the experience of
engaging with these works over the next few weeks, I will be writing
down and editing those words that I have written as I go along. So if
you are interested in travelling this journey with me bookmark this
page and pop in over the next few weeks. I am expecting that I will
construct something that is part review, part travelogue and part
introspective.

# Everything Under

I read through *Everything Under* in four distinct moments of reading.

I read Chapter One the evening before the flight from Gatwick, London
to Oakland, California. I was sitting in my home in North West London
in the late evening. My family was sleeping in the house. I read the
first chapter slowly and reread and reread... to get a feel, a taste,
a sense, for the novel. A clear strong voice telling me about the
predetermination of the spaces of your minds came through. She was
asking me to think about the nature of my thoughts as being the
manifestation of the already. It was an uncanny feeling. A fate that
determines every act and choice you make, undermining those acts and
choices - and is never your friend.

I fell asleep relentlessly comparing this uncanny fate, with the human
being as witnesses of the river's stories; against that of Moses and
Israel standing in front of the River Jordan with Nature as the
witness. The two stories winded their ways across each other through
my dreams. The one in which every moment is a choice that determines
the universe as its reflection; and the other in which every moment,
evey choice is a reflection of a bewildering, unkind fate.

I read a few more chapters in a departure lounge at Gatwick, waiting
for the flight. I got slowly into the story, though having a brash
Salesman on the phone sitting next to me was a difficult distraction
to overcome. But I started feeling Gretel's hunt for meaning along the
river; trying to follow the crumbs home. I drank whiskey.

Once seated on the plane, I read a few more chapters getting a third
of the way through the work before my eyes started getting tired. I
had an elderly lady sitting next to me. We chatted. I then had a nap
on the plane for about two and a half hours. After that I read the
rest of novel in one long read (with noise cancelling headphones), in
which I became entranced in this story lost in an England that I never
knew existed. An England of locks and rivers and canals and a river
people. The story at moments had me completely in its thrall. I lost
myself in parts, submerged in the words.

I will start on *The Overstory* either tonight, or tomorrow. I am far
away now, about to fall asleep somewhere in San Jose. And I have been
awake for over 24 hours.

# The Overstory

Time passes through this book at a different pace. I am working in
another land with different trees to what I am a familiar. Finding
moments to read is not as easy as I would like, but I am ninety pages
into the novel, in which each chapter so far has journeyed through
generations of different diverse families as their stories pass
alongside another story, a slower story, and so far all the stories,
whether slow or fast or under or over, have been sad but tremendously
beautiful.

I am loving the book and when time gets late in the Santa Clara
office, I find a chair and bring and end to my work and read quietly.
I am driving the car, so I need to wait until the others finish their
days too; but I wait inside the green world of trees and the people
who live faster in their shadow.

I bought a re-usable coffee mug as I wandered around on the weekend to
be better with my consumption as I wandered around San Jose. I also
had *The Overstory* alongside me. Eventually, after wandering the
downtown area we found ourselves in a hipster coffee space; and I sat
down with the book for a while. The coffee cup that I had put in the
same bag had leaked. Coffee had stained the bottom edging of the book,
marking it.

The book has me now. It is attached to me as I live in the this
transitory space. The story is also set in the same state, and
sometimes in the same streets I am in. I read it here in its real and
imagined. I read in between moments.

And then I pause. I look about. I look at the sky, I look at the
trees. I stop. I start. I am disconnected and connected as I pass the
next hundred pages and the stories settle from generational stories to
individuals; and into one story in which they start eddying closer
together, to each other.

The story is changing me. In the unwinding stories taking place, what
stands out the most is that there is a greater story that can also be
heard. And I am now looking out at the trees, the sky and at the
natural world which had been elided from my senses. I am looking out
from my story, from my family story, from my national story - at the
overstory.

Its four am in the morning and I have been unable to sleep for a few
hours already. Soon I will be getting up for breakfast and heading
down to San Francisco to take the ferry to Sausalito; and then walking
back along the Golden Gate Bridge. I am looking forward to seeing the
glorious natural bodies of sky and water.

I was at the Ferry Building by ten, and soon on the ferry to
Sausalito, I felt the wind against my face as I leaned over the side
from the top bank. Once in Sausalito we walked up through the suburbs
up steps and along little roads until we crossed the free-way and
found the access into the SCA Trail which took me through a beautiful
natural landscape. I got lost in the natural space, listening to my
breath and looking up and out into at a perfectly clear day.

Crossed through forests, over tops, through breath taking views
eventually reaching the Golden Gate bridge, which I walked across. At
some points I felt I was in the landscape of the book itself·

I woke up at two a.m. in the morning and read using my phone as a
torch, seeing there is no bedside table light in the rididculous
airBNB rental. I got into that steady state where you do not notice
the pages turning as the story becomes all. When I went back to sleep,
I noticed I had read a hundred pages.

The stories are all winding together now, spinning and climbing around
each other like vines around the trunk of a tree. The world tree.
Reading was like drinking cold water after running in the heat of the
day. Its been a while since I read constantly and significantly, and
it feels a bit like excercise for the right muscles to become active
for a regular pace and the right combination of pieces of the system
to fit together and work together. But the mental fatigue I found at
the beginning only after a few pages is disappearing now. It feels
good.

On the last full day in California I woke up up at four am in the
morning and met Thomas just after five am at the Starbucks near the
Mission Peak nature reserve in Fremont. Thomas ran Ultra marathons for
many years and still runs the Mission Peak trail every Thursday if he
can.

None of the others turned up so we started up just the two of us. He
was worried we would not have enough time to reach the top in time for
him to make it back to his meetings. I said I cannot run, but I think
I can stride fast; as I have been doing that every day for the last 6
months. And started striding at the pace I use every morning, he was
startled that I could move that fast. So was I. We strode for over an
hour, uphill. Sometimes over very steep areas, past trees, through
trees, around rocks. In the dark, in the fog. It was sublime. He knew
the way, in the dark. I just moved fast in his shadow. It was a trance
of steady pace in beauty.

We reached the top on time. I had carried a toasted beigel and cream
cheese that I had bought at Starbucks and a bottle of water. It was
too foggy to see the apparently amazing views. But standing at the
peak of a mountain in the fog is still a very special kind of beauty.

He left running to make it back for his meeting, and I sat down an
enjoyed the realisation that I am no longer not fit. I still hesitate
to call myself fit, but something has shifted. I gantered down the
side of the mountain; as the fog lifted. My wandering included a copse
drizzled with light and fog, and then the shade of an huge old shady
oak. Oakland. I imagined a land of oaks in my mind's eye. How this
country must of looked when it was virginal. The skies became blue and
the views touched me. I took my time. Moments in time like this are
few and far between. And I know it, and I gulped it down the side of
the mountain.

I read a little the final evening after watching a documentary on
Netflix about the life of Bob Weir; the pace of the novel has changed.
The high energy has dissipitated together with the 70s and the 80s and
the 90s and the actual environmental destruction that has happened;
and its all tinged with intimation that perhaps its too late now.

In the lounge at the Oakland airport I had about 3 hours and about 180
pages left. I timed my reading rate, and my growing ability to read in
focus and concentration and finished the last page exactly at the time
my boarding card said that boarding the flight to Gatwick, London was
due to begin.

Its a sad beautiful book that evokes a deep love for our natural world
and the people who can see and love it. There are a few strands of
ideas in which the author is reaching out from the novel with a
political call. Spefically there is a repeating riff referring to the
bystander bias, a concept in which when many people witness something
going very wrong - every bystander assumes one of the other bystanders
will do something to save the situation. And no-one does.

I have *The Long Take (or a way to lose more slowly)* to read on the
plane. Its actually a two hundred and twenty five page poem. Because
its a poem I am going to try read it literally in one long take; in
one continuous read whilst above the clouds. I will do that after the
food service when the mood of plane shifts, the lights dim and those
who can and will, sleep.


# The Long Take

So I ate dinner and watched a pop culture film on the plane.
Eventually the lights dimmed and the over excitable movie ended. The
cabin quietened down. I took out the book, put on my noise cancelling
headphones and entered into the one long read. The reading over the
previous few weeks has increased the speed it takes to get into that
slightly shifted consciousness of the reading mind.

I saw the world through the eyes of man whose soul is damaged from his
experiences fighting the nazis in France in the 1940s. And the world
he sees whilst moving through the cities of New York, Los Angeles and
San Francisco.

He sees man's inhumanity to man wherever he goes; and see the good
suffer and the bad triumph. He watches good people being undone and he
cannot find a way to escape the horrors he witnessed in others and in
himself in the war; and the continuation of that horror in the federal
and state policies.

The poetic style and smaller pages are powerful. The landscapes of
both New York and San Francisco enrapt me as I know the spaces. The
tenderloin and Union Square today still have many homeless veterans. I
remember buying a Starbucks coffee for a homeless crippled quiet
gentle veteran in Union Square who talked about his daughter. I
remember an aggressive homeless young woman in the tenderloin who
tried to bully me into giving her money and swore at me when I did not
respond aggreeably to her. I have never been beyond the airport in Los
Angeles, so when the work moved these streets I was not as entranced
as I did not know the city.

I also found myself remembering a vagrant friend of mine from the 90s
who lived on the streets; because he could not abide by being stifled
inside a house. He was from England but was nomadic. He could not stay
still just like Walker in the novel. He played a guitar and was
missing teeth and had a contagious sense of humour. He used to always
be carving tiny wooden sculptures from tree branches. He did one for
me of a man sitting and reading. I no longer have it. The last time I
remember seeing him was in 1999 in Ben Yehuda square in Jerusalem.

I had a family of Koreans sitting around me, next to me, behind me.
Right next to me was the mother. She had a book also she was reading,
written in an elegant Korean script. I could not recognise one letter,
but the words and letters looked beautiful and crisp.

Reading the entire book in one long take felt like the best way to
really read and feel this poor good man destroyed eventually by the
evil he found not only pervasive in the society and policies but also
that he had seen in himself and others in the war he could not leave
behind.

Gatwick immigration and customs was quick and easy. But the Uber drive
took me east on the M25 instead of west which prolonged the journey
and the cost. I got home eventually to a very happy family to see me
again.

I will read the Mars Room on the flight to South Africa on Monday.

# Mars Room

Again the San Francisco geography was familiar enough to add to the
engagement, and the Los Angeles geography less so. I started reading
as planned, but did not make it right to the end by the end of the
flight. I still had about sixty to seventy pages to go when the plane
landed. I finished the last pages before going to sleep after working
from a hotel during the day. Still struggling with the San Francisco
jetlag.

The novel is beautifully crafted and secrets the reader into the world
of the American's woman's penal system. Its not a pretty world, and
nor are the people living in it.


My ranking with two books left to read is as follows:


| Rank | Title | 
|------|------------------| 
| 1 | The Long Take | 
| 2 | The Overstory | 
| 3 | Everything Under | 
| 4 | The Mars Room |


I will start Washington Black next for the evenings, and then
hopefully the Milkman for the return flight to London. I am on track
to have read all six and considered my ranking before the announcement
of the winner next week.

# Washington Black

I started Washington Black in the evenings before going to sleep.
Subsequently, I have found a morning walk across to Rosebank center
where a Starbucks opens at 6am and various breakfast places at 630am.

This morning I made my way through the Rosebank streets for the second 
time in two days. The Spaza shops on the side of the streets selling
simple cheap foods. Next to the one bus stop is a man with a deep
frier selling fried potatoe chips at 630 am. A large part of the
street pavements are all excavated for what looks like the
installation of high speed internet fibre.

Once at Rosebank I read Washington Black for a few hours, before
heading back to the hotel to join up with my parents and then onto a
day. I intend to keep reading the same way tomorrow morning.

The book is well written and easy to read. I am not sure yet what I
make of it, whether its just a simple enjoyable read or there is
something further inside the words that will open up some new
insights, knowledge or thoughts as all the other books so far have. Or
whether its just a very good, well crafted read.

Another morning, approaching Starbucks with my book and glasses, I found
blaring music and a line of people. It was 5 FM's birthday apparently,
and Roger Goode was running the 5 FM breakfast show live from the Starbucks.

Free coffee and breakfast he said. However that was as long as it was some
kind of sugary pumpkin spice latte, or sugary pumpkin spice frappuchino 
with a large muffin. Anything else you had to pay for, even if it cost less.

So I paid for a regular coffee and found a spot at the back and
watched the radio show being run, read my book. The first time I saw
Roger Goode he was not yet a radio DJ. He was then DJing at a bar in
Durban, and he was friendly with a computer programmer that worked for
Derivco that used to introduce himself to people as Dr Strange. It
took me years to find out that Dr Strange's name was actually Andrew.
It was Eran Eyal that introduced me to Dr Strange and Eran Eyal was
just in gaol in New York's Ryker's island according to some newspaper
article I just read, and is now bailed out, for apparent misdeeds. He
says he is innocent and this is shocking and unfair. I hope all works
out well for him. Time passes in this world with strange ripples.

He was working around with his microphone, growling "Good Morning" into 
his microphone, and then pointing the microphone at people to respond.

On the last day I did this walk to the Starbucks, I suddenly found a
police van stop beside me as I was walking and tell me that they found
it suspicious that I was walking early on a Saturday morning with a bag held
closely to the side of my body. It looked like I was carrying a large 
amount of cash, and holding it like that to prevent it being snatched.

I said "Whaaaaat!?!". I said, I am just walking to Starbucks to read my book.
The two largish, black men, with guns and police uniforms repeated their 
bizarre accusation and asked if I would give them the bag. So I did.

The looked, in a very puzzled way at *Washington Black* and ruffled through the
pages looking for hidden compartments I suppose. They then repeated the same
thing, but in a more confused way about how it looked like I was trying to hide something
by holding the bag. And then asked me where I was staying. I told them the Protea Hotel.
The questioning continued. I felt the conversation was going nowhere, and said I
would like to continue on my walk now. The police officers then very kindly offered
me a lift up to the coffee shop, and to my amazement the one officer got out of
the van to walk around to the back to open it up for me. I said, "No, thanks", I was
walking to the coffee shop, because I like walking.

The one officer then noticed I had my wallet in my pocket and asked what that
was. I explained it was a wallet in my pocket. He asked if he could see it, to see it really 
was a wallet (and I felt he was intimating that he suspected it was not a wallet
but perhaps some kind of thick wad of cash). I showed him it was just a plain
old run of mill wallet.

I then said, I would like to head off to get my coffee and read my
book now, please. And then, to my bewilderment, they explained again
about how it looks suspicious how I was holding the bag. So I then
showed them how I would hold the bag differently, in a more light way
in which it would be easy for anyone who wanted to snatch the bag from
me without any issues, to snatch the bag - and I promised them I would
walk the rest of the way with the bag easily snatchable in this way,
so they need not worry about that anymore. At this point, although
they looked a bit saddened, they agreed that yes, if I walked with the
bag in that way in which it was very easy to snatch then it would be
easy to snatch and then I did not look like I was trying to carry 
a large amount of cash in it. And with that, I left on my way, holding my
bag in a way that anyone who wanted it could easily grab it from me.
And I continued to hold that bag, that way, for the rest of my walk.


I had my regular morning coffee, and also popped by Woolworths to get a white shirt
that fitted me properly and a belt to wear at the wedding. By the end of the reading
that morning I only had about 70 pages left.

I finished the last pages, early morning, when suffering from insomnia on the day
of the wedding. I will be leaving soon and checking out of the Johannesburg hotel and
heading to the country side venue.

I thoroughly enjoyed the read. At moments it reminded me of Candide by Voltaire. But not quite.
My earlier comments and opinion on the book was not changed as I read through it. Its
a delight to read, and easy to move through the captivating story, but it remains in 5th
place of the 5 books read so far.

One more book to read of the six on the Short List, which I may start earlier than on
the flight home now.



