---
title: Man Booker 2018 (and me)
layout: page
---
I have decided as part of my new year introspection to read the [Man
Booker
shortlist](https://themanbookerprize.com/fiction/news/man-booker-prize-announces-2018-shortlist)
before the final award is announced Tuesday 16 October in Londonâ€™s
Guildhall. This gives me about 3 weeks to read through and reach my
opinions and thoughts before watching the live announcement on the
BBC.

At the same time I will be travelling, so the reading will occur in
London, Santa Clara (San Francisco) and Johannesburg (South Africa).

In order to help me form my thoughts and understand the experience of
engaging with these works over the next few weeks, I will be writing
down and editing those words that I have written as I go along. So if
you are interested in travelling this journey with me bookmark this
page and pop in over the next few weeks. I am expecting that I will
construct something that is part review, part travelogue and part
introspective.

# Everything Under

I read through *Everything Under* in four readings. I read Chapter 1
the evening before the flight from London Gatwick to Oakland. I read
the first chapter slowly and also read it twice to get a feel for the
novel. The sense of a strong sense of determinancy came through
clearly.

I feel asleep relentlessly comparing the fate emergent from the the
rivers of England, with the human being as witnesses of the river's
stories; against that of Moses and Israel standing in front of the
River Jordan with Nature as the witness. The two stories winded their
ways across each other through my dreams.

I read a few more chapters in a departure lounge at Gatwick, waiting
for the flight. I got slowly into the story, though having a brash
Salesman on the phone sitting next to was a difficult distraction to
overcome. But I started feeling Gretel's hunt for meaning along the
river; trying to follow the crumbs home.

Once seated on the plane, I read a few more chapters getting a third
of the way through the work before my eyes started getting tired. I
then had a nap on the plane for about 2 1/2 hours. After that I read
the rest of novel in one long read (with noise cancelling headphones),
in which I became entranced in this story lost in an England that I
never used existed. An England of locks and rivers and canals and a
river people. The story at moments had me completely in its thrall.

I will start on *The Overstory* either tonight, or tomorrow. I am far
away now, about to fall asleep somewhere in San Jose. And I have been
awake for over 24 hours.
