---
layout: post
title:  "cloud, cloud, cloud"
image: ''
date:   2016-11-25
tags:
- cloud
description: ''
categories:
- cloud presentation
serie: cloud
---
[tl;dr][2]


The Cloud, Cloud, Cloud presentation includes "four" sections.

### IoT items
Some IoT items including a dash for ordering toilet paper are passed around.
There is also an echo dot, connected up.
The presentation is started off with some interaction with [Alexa][1] via the echo dot.
(I forgot these items at home, so this part was left out of the *LJC Unconference* presentation.) 
It is stressed that these devices are connected directly to the cloud and this serves as the segway into the slides.


### Slides
[slides][2]


The second part of the presentation involves going through the slides in an interactive way with the audience. 
The slides themselves are lean and bare to guide the ideas that are unpacked, rather than imprison, the presentation. 
By the end of the slides everyone in the room should be completely clear on what the 'cloud' is, why it is called the 'cloud' and
aware that it is changing the way we work and the world around us. 
The last slide asks the question "what does this mean for *Global IT*"; and this serves as a segway into the exploration.


### Exploration
[AWS][3], [Azure][4], [Blue Mix][5] and [Google Cloud Platform][6] are opened in a browser on the large screen in place of the slides from earlier ... 
and we wander around through them, exploring different areas. The areas are chosen based on where interests have most been shown during the earlier part 
of the presentation.
The exploration also includes a bit of tour through the different 'clouds' showing some of the bespoke stuff that has been put in the accounts opened up.
Amazon Lamda is specifically called out, and server less architecture explained and a Lamda function for an Alexa skill that has been written opened specifically 
and then it is demonstrated via the Echo.


### Conclusion
Questions and a discussion concludes the presentation. 
If the interactivity that has been encouraged throughout the presentation has succeeded this piece is quite fun.
And then I finish off with asking Alexa "What is the cloud?"

---


#### One More Thing
* The presentation has been run at a company and was well received.
* The presentation was run at the *LJC Unconference* Nov 26 2016 and was well received. 

#### One More Thing
My slides are *always* a work in progress and there may or may not be slides added, changed or deleted without warning.

#### One More Thing
If you are interested in me running the presentation with your team please contact me through the normal mechanisms.


[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Echo 
[2]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1bzUkWtEm-0mwCt5KAgFOxwurEICIbfecFGG39ow5yYI/edit#slide=id.gd251bb473_0_681
[3]: https://aws.amazon.com/console/
[4]: https://portal.azure.com/
[5]: https://new-console.eu-gb.bluemix.net
[6]: https://cloud.google.com

<!--  LocalWords:  Alexa Lamda segway
 -->
